[Music]
in 535 ad scientific evidence suggests
that a massive volcano erupted in the
tropics it threw up so much ash that it
turns summer to winter crops failed for
years
drought and famine gripped the land
millions died
for the last five years David Keyes a
writer on history and archaeology has
immersed himself in this worldwide
climatic catastrophe by consulting
historian scientists and in particular
volcanologists Keyes has concluded that
the most likely culprit was the
notorious volcano Krakatoa an expedition
to Krakatoa which lies off the coast of
Indonesia further supported his theory
but Keyes believes that the eruption the
biggest in the last 1,500 years
was only the beginning what followed was
over a hundred years of upheaval that
would change the course of human history
forever
[Music]
so what would the volcanic eruption of
one and a half thousand years ago have
been like the amount of power generated
by this eruption would have been
equivalent to around 2,000 million
Hiroshima sized nuclear bombs
the eruption of this ancient Krakatoa is
something mankind has never witnessed
perhaps tens hundreds of times larger
than any volcano that's ever been
witnessed David Keyes asked
volcanologist dr. ken Wilentz an expert
on Krakatoa to feed all the available
data about sixth century climate change
into a supercomputer to simulate how the
explosion began to unfold I will start
the simulation it will show several
phases of the eruption Willits has
located the eruption in the Sunda
straits between Java and Sumatra by
combining tree-ring and ice core data
with eyewitness accounts of the dimming
of the Sun it's possible to estimate how
much material might have been thrown up
into the Earth's atmosphere with that
figure it's possible to calculate the
scale and power of the explosion and
associated after effects using maletas
model we have reconstructed the Krakatoa
535 ad Big Bang
a giant red hot fountain of molten Ross
and a vast cloud of ash towered over the
countryside then a second crack would
have led seawater
this caused an absolutely vast explosion
creating a 30-mile high fountain magma
dust and ash up to a thousand miles away
ash rain down on forests and fields
the towering clouds of steam and gas and
ash pierced them and shot upwards and at
times when it seems like no go no higher
it would continue to go high eventually
to the point where it started to block
out the Sun in all directions and that
gray white cloud within seed has sort of
moved laterally across the sky like a
mushroom cloud
the fallout from the eruption would have
been the natural equivalent of nuclear
winter
[Music]
so how did Krakatoa affect the world Ken
will let's a studied Krakatoa in detail
and he can see similarities between it
and a huge dormant volcano near his
laboratory high in the hills of New
Mexico the 15 mile wide volcanic crater
or caldera at valle grande New Mexico
last exploded a million years ago ash
from here landed as far away as
Louisiana using the remains of valle
grande ken shows how high-flying
volcanic ash blocks out the Sun this is
ultrafine volcanic ash formed by free at
aplenty and eruption similar to what we
think happened in the 6th century the
Krakatoa it's so fine
that even just a baby's breath of air
will keep it suspended by my new
turbulence it will never fall to the
earth as long as the air is moving which
of course it always does high up in the
atmosphere
in 535 ad similar microscopic particles
of action sulfur dioxide from Krakatoa
would have shrouded the whole sky
turning it endlessly gray temperatures
dropped without the full strength of the
Sun to heat the oceans less water would
have evaporated and the atmosphere
became drier and drier
as a result believing progressively less
rainfall as a result the word droughts
and famines very often at the end of
major droughts you get massive floods
and that seems to have been what
occurred but what fascinated David Keyes
most was not the climatic catastrophe
itself but the possible effects on human
civilization
[Music]
I began to think to myself well
disruption as severe as this has got to
have political consequences this is
really the long-term consequences that I
was interested in in ISIL to see whether
one big event can actually have a
knock-on effect throughout history
worldwide he's decided to examine a
series of historical puzzles of the 6th
century AD he looked at events which
from contemporary writings and
archaeological evidence were known to
have taken place but whose cause has
never been properly explained
the first puzzle was the spread of a
terrible disease which brought the
greatest superpower of the time the
Roman Empire to its knees in 535 ad
under the Emperor Justinian the late
Roman Empire based in Constantinople was
flourishing but in 542 ad
something Awful's struck at the heart of
Justinian's glittering empire the
horrors were described by a contemporary
writer a monk called Evagrius
with some people it began in the head
maybe are his blood and the face squad
descended to the sprout and then remove
them from mankind with others there was
a flow angled about
[Music]
Evagrius was describing a massive
outbreak of bubonic plague the first
time it was recorded in history but how
could the plague have anything to do
with the climatic catastrophe unleashed
seven years before plague is a bacteria
a bacillus transmitted from infected
rats to humans the carrier is the humble
flea which feeds on rats blood this is a
flea which had a blood meal and there's
no plague organisms and it's gout and
you can see that it's quite stomachs
quite full and everything's fine
if we look at if we contrast this with a
flea which has taken up some of the
Pasillas we see that the there's a
blockage here and this is brought about
by a reaction between the bacillus and
the fleas gap now result of this is
cause of the flea count feed properly
and they become so ravenously hungry
because they they begin to starve in
effect they the more they eat well they
can eat and eat and eat and they don't
satisfy their hunger because their gut
is blocked and so they will jump on to
absolutely anything in the chance of
getting a free meal
as the rats themselves died from the
plague the flea has an obvious new
target to bite for blood humans and then
as Evagrius describes the agony begins
some came out in force which gave rise
to great fevers and they would die two
or three days later with their minds in
the same state as those who had suffered
nothing and with their bodies still
robust others lost their senses before
dying what keys found out is that
scientists now know that outbreaks of
plague are strongly related to changes
in climate the sort of changes that
followed 5:35 in particular cooling
could have had a huge impact on the
spread of the disease temperature
directly affects how the plague bacteria
form in the fleas gut or plague young
epidemics our temperature related what
happens is that in the in the gutter the
flea the the fibrin clots only forms at
temperatures below 25 degrees centigrade
above 25 degrees centigrade the cloth
doesn't form and any facility simply
passed out of the flea with the thesis
if cooler conditions bring about the
onset of the disease did that happen in
535 ad and if so where when according to
one of our contemporary sources the
church historian Evagrius the plague
Ridge nated in Ethiopia what we know
both scientifically and historically is
that the Great Lakes area Central Africa
is one of the oldest fuki of plague
activities in the world and that it
would appear that the assertion of your
pancreas is correct because Africa is
normally hot the disease is kept at bay
but if Africa was affected by the global
cooling of 535 and 536 it would have
been a lethal breeding ground for plague
from Africa via the trade routes ships
rats and sailors could easily bring the
plague up the coast first hitting the
major port of Alexandria in Egypt and on
into the heart of the Roman Empire and
Roman greed for one precious commodity
from African elephants would only
accelerate that process in the 6th
century there was an enormous trade in
African ivory hundreds of tons of ivory
are being brought into the Empire every
year and being processed for luxury
furniture for luxury objects which
important magistrate's would give out as
gifts process for diplomatic gift that
the Empire could then used to impress
his neighbors further to the north and
further to the west people who have
never had seen an elephant in their
lives
and it was essentially European and
Mediterranean greed for ivory that
brought the roofing only seven years
after the climatic catastrophe in 542 ad
on the back of the ivory trade the
plague surged into Constantinople its
impact was devastating we had so
disposed of over 10,000 bodies a day
week after week after week throwing them
into the sea of special boats kicking
them in the towers of the city wall
filling up systems digging out of
orchards soldiers were forced to dig
mass graves in which to cast the bodies
of those who had died the impression is
one of chaos and pandemonium
Constantinople Europe's biggest cities
tanked the month after month after month
one contemporary writer recorded but
when the number of dead reached a
quarter of a million City officials
simply stopped counting as people left
the stricken city they took the play to
towns villages and farms throughout the
empire untold millions died
and unknown to the Empire a second
mortal threat was brewing 3,000 miles to
the east the climatic catastrophe was
also having an extraordinary effect on
an extraordinary people they too would
play their part in the decline of the
Roman Empire and the simple reason to
this new threat was the difference
between the digestive systems of horses
and cows in the isolated plains of
Mongolia hundreds of miles north of
China something strange was about to
happen before 535 ad the overlords of
the region were a tribe of violent
barbarian horsemen the others Chinese
writers recorded their uncivilized way
of life
these are foul-smelling
barbarians from their point of view
without rageous habits the armoires
never bathed never wash their clothing
they cleaned their dishes by having the
women licked them dry all of which was
simply horrifying to the Chinese but in
one respect as both Chinese chronicles
and archaeological finds show the others
were years ahead of the competition
fines from archaeological digs all over
of our territories suggest that they
were the most advanced horsemen in the
world their style of riding saddles and
mount bits are still in use by Hungarian
things Minh today and many believe that
the others almost certainly invented the
stirrup it was this large concentration
of horses that gave them a military edge
the latest in the military technology of
that era the horses also provided food
and sustenance the Avars drank fermented
mares milk an alcoholic beverage
so horses were central to their
[Applause]
but then in 535 and 536 the years of the
catastrophe Chinese records and tree
ring evidence from Siberia suggest that
the Mongolian steppe was crippled by
cold and dry conditions the knock-on
effect would have been long-term lasting
decades by 552 ad the others were
attacked by people who lived in the
surrounding highlands the Turks they had
previously been ruled by leav ours
mysteriously the one's invincible of our
horsemen were crushed
up until now the cause of this sudden
reversal of power has never been
explained but then David keys have an
idea
[Music]
so I was repelled by this and decided to
try to try and find out what the
mechanism was by the world maybe it's
something to do with their economy well
the a bar economy was a horse based one
the Turk economy was a much more mixed
one involving considerable numbers of
cattle the question came to my mind well
was there something about the way that
cattle economy works and a horse economy
works the difference between those that
might shed some light on the political
events on the demise of the avars Keyes
contacted John Milne at McCauley
land-use center in Aberdeen mill has
made a detailed study of how different
animals feed and survive yes
these horses here are actually highland
ponies but in terms of the sort of size
they're very similar to what I believe
the other horses would have been like
they're quite similar to some of the
lists in terms of size in terms of a
Mongolian and Kazakh horses that you
that you see now mooom had done
intriguing research into the difference
between horse dung and cow dung here you
can see some horse dung and you can see
that the it's very fibrous which
demonstrates and it's made up of a
fairly large pieces of fiber which
demonstrates that this has not been well
digested by the horse now if you
compared some cattle faeces you would
see that it was much more finely ground
up and in fact much better digested that
little horse manure could the contrast
in horses and cows digestive systems
have made a vital strategic difference
on the Mongolian steppes when after the
catastrophe grass and vegetation
where
a terrible state choice of a greater
efficiency to digest food they also the
ability to eat a wider range of
different average types so they can eat
for example very rank vegetation in
contrast the horses are less capable of
eating ranked really poor quality
vegetation than cattle and in a drought
situation you get you would get
eventually to the state where the horse
was not able to eat enough food and
because it was not be able to digest it
successfully then it would not be able
to survive and so in those consequence
circumstances then the average would be
very vulnerable
[Applause]
I was absolutely amazed when I found
that in fact it was merely the
differences between cows and a horse's
stomach design that had probably had
such a major effect on subsequent
history Chinese chronicles record how in
the defeat by the once subject Turks
thousands of Avars were slaughtered or
enslaved their leader committed suicide
most of the surviving others began a
4,000 mile trek westwards their journey
triggered according to David Keyes by
the catastrophe was about to have a huge
effect on history the of our refugee
caravan cut across what is now northern
Kazakhstan skirting the northern shores
of the Caspian Sea and on into the
fertile grassland to the south of the
Carpathian Mountains an area which is
now the Balkans and as they traveled the
avars recovered their horse technology
was still superior to anything they
found on their route once again the
avars became a conquering people driving
all others before them until finally
Roman writers recall how they reached
the fringes of the Roman Empire
arrived from the lake five fifties
refugees within a decade they're
ruthless horsemanship ruthless military
ability has come to dominate all the
tribes all the groups of Slavs hums
Germans living north of the Danube on
the Empire's frontiers and having
imposed their control over these groups
Davos can then turn their attention
against the Empire the Roman Empire
already weakened by the play was
constantly harassed by other incursions
at one point Constantinople was besieged
by the barbarians
rather than take over the others opted
for blackmail and extracted vast amounts
of gold from the empire in return for
not fighting some of it can be seen
today in museums much of it is still
believed to lie buried in the plains of
Hungary
it's reckoned that over fifty years the
Avars netted in today's terms seven
billion pounds worth of gold from the
Roman Empire
[Music]
the a bar impact combined with the
plague and the economic problems has
ensued destabilize the Empire and at the
end of the day it can all be traced back
to this climatic destabilization of the
6th century which was triggered by the
volcanic eruption
David Keys believed a patent was
emerging which showed huge political
consequences stemming from the
catastrophe it already found evidence of
the catastrophes effects throughout
Europe and the East now he turned to the
Americas where he found another
extraordinary coincidence of timing and
another historical puzzle where a great
city had been destroyed but no one had
ever known why in the early 6th century
125,000 people lived in tear 2 akan in
the central Mexican plain in 500 AD when
the city reached its peak it really was
what is called a primate city by that I
mean the second next largest city is so
far below it in size that really you
could almost say there are no other
cities I mean that's an overstatement
obviously but there were cities of
10,000 people 20,000 but compared to the
hundred twenty-five thousand here it was
nothing
so it was the only huge large city in
the entire central Mexican plateau then
midway through the sixth century shortly
after the 535 ad catastrophe things
began to go wrong in tear tear car
for the past 20 years
Rebecca's story has been painstakingly
studying skeletons of people who lived
in one of the city's suburbs called
kahega
the bones provide a remarkable history
of the populations health well the
Tlingit population has adults
it also has quite a few children in an
awful lot of babies
Rebecca story began to notice that in
teotihuacn later period the population
in particular the babies suffered a
severe decline in health these kinds of
infections that show up on the bone are
long-lasting bacterial infections and
they're very common on the children now
babies shouldn't have infections like
this normally they should be born with
relatively good immunological protection
from their parents their mother but in
the case of bling we find lots of babies
with already infectious reactions
indicating that the health of the
mothers was so poor that the children
are getting sick as well
the problem with the very late
population and around the country is
that overwhelmingly it is babies
children and individuals under the age
of 25 they should not be dying at that
proportion so they start to become 70
percent of my sample rather than a much
lower 40 or 45 percent that they were in
the earlier period it is a population
that is in great trouble is probably
collapsing new scientific evidence
suggests that the city's declined
occurred around the middle to late sixth
century a hundred and fifty years
earlier than previously thought
for David Keyes this read ating was a
breakthrough now in fact one can see
that tear to archons fall really comes
straight on the heels of the climatic
disaster and I think that there's a very
very high chance that you are are
connected there are no existing tree
rings or other evidence from Mexico
itself to show whether there was a
significant climate change
however Lake deposits in the nearby
Yucatan Peninsula show a 30-year long
drought starting in the mid 60s
tree ring evidence from Chile and
California shows a dramatic reduction in
tree growth from the late 5:00 30s
onwards and a study of river levels in
Colombia shows that the mid to late
sixth century was the driest period in
the last 3,000 years the evidence
throughout the Americas combined with
Rebecca story's findings of malnutrition
suggest that Teotihuacan was gripped by
a long-lasting drought a drought which
according to David Keyes's theory was
directly linked to the climatic
catastrophe and had a devastating effect
on the city's supply of food and
something happened to the food supply
will that make people more subject to
getting ill because they're not getting
enough food then this is a very dry
environment water had to always have to
be a very important thing and without
water you have great sanitation problems
Fantasia would then lead to lots of
diseases circulating through the people
and causing mortality and they'll help
and that affects the productivity of
city cities not productive witness
people are sick and that becomes one of
the things that then say well no we
don't want to go to Teotihuacan anymore
because it's not a good place to be
according to the latest research tell to
your conne was finally destroyed when
the people rose up against their leader
smashing their palaces and setting light
to the city's biggest temple
somebody went in there and said fired
all the roof beams and cause the ceiling
and roof to collapse
bring down the upper walls and form a
big mound of debris well then and that's
what happened all up and down the Main
Street of the city
maybe they decided that elite class that
was making demands on them was asking
too much that the priests were
supposedly bringing the rain and making
the springs flow were no longer
successful because the because the
spring flow was dropping and the rains
were diminishing and they lost
confidence maybe in the priestly class
as well what appears to happen is that
you've got a destabilization perhaps
some religious and political changes
followed by revolution of some sort and
the collapse of the city in a way
similar to events in in Europe indeed in
the way that Constantinople remanent
power is affected 5:35 disturbs the
status quo and allows history to reform
itself all over the world it really is
the interface between the ancient world
and the world we live in today
in central Mexico it took 300 years for
a new civilization to establish itself
throughout the 6th century a similar
story was unfolding all over the planet
ancient civilizations crumbling others
just beginning
and according to David Keys one example
of an emerging Natan was England itself
Britain in the mid 610 Cheree
the Dark Ages the Romans had left a
hundred years earlier in the west of the
island native British tribes the coats
fought to stem the tide of anglo-saxon
invasion from Northern Europe according
to legend it was the time of the death
of King Arthur his country turned into a
wasteland as he rode off through the
land he found trees down grain destroyed
and all things laid waste as if
lightning had struck in each place you
had half the people in the villages dead
[Music]
the Earth's no longer produced when
cultivated from that time on no heat or
the grain through their new tree bore
fruit and very few fish were found in
the sea for this reason the two kingdoms
are called the wasteland
but could the wasteland of legend be a
distant memory of a climatic catastrophe
that really did hit the native British
as a result of 535 what is certain
British and Irish Allen's is that the
bubonic plague which had devastated
Roman Empire finally reached Britain by
around 547 ad it entered mainly through
ports on the Cornish coast from which
the British still traded with the Roman
Empire this was a significant event in
the history of Western Britain and
Ireland certainly as one goes through
the annals one can find many references
to plagues one of them is referred to as
the motile itis Magna the great
mortality other one is the mortality us
prema the first plague like this this
does suggest something special they
never experienced the plague before it
was completely a new horror that they
knew nothing about they wouldn't have
understood what was happening suddenly
people began to develop these terrible
pustules underneath their armpits in
their groins and they would have died in
the most terrible agony
according to Keyes the plague changed
the political shape of Britain at this
time Britain was divided in two in the
West lived the native Celtic Britons the
East was occupied by invaders from
Europe the Angles and Saxons East and
West had very little contact with each
other
the Celtic Britons traded with the Roman
world
the anglo-saxon peoples traded mainly
with their former homelands of Germany
and Scandinavia it meant that the Celts
the native Britons were far more exposed
to the plague arriving from the Roman
Empire so by the time you come into the
latter part of the century the Celtic
West and center beam have experienced a
huge population reduction there's a
population vacuum and so Anglo Saxon
peoples are able to move from the east
they move west into harshali empty lands
and England was was born Jesus theory is
that England came about because the
Anglo Saxons were able to defeat the
plague stricken Britons a sixth century
poem tells of the defeat of one group of
Celts the man of God often and their
leader murder
nice whoo yo c'mon he did not retreat
from battle until blood flowed like
rushes he cut down men who did not flee
the men of God Auden relates on the
floor of the hall but before Murdock's
tent when he returned they would come
but one from a hundred easily one can
see five three files of watershed where
you see the forces coming into play
which create such countries as England
Spain France Japan the United China now
came the final and boldest turn in his
theory could it be that the catastrophe
was linked not just to the emergence of
new nations but also to the birth of a
new world religion Islam
[Music]
this is all that is left today of the
married Dan in Yemen at the southern tip
of Arabia but at the beginning of the
sixth century
Yemen was the region's greatest power it
depended on the merab - its greatest
piece of engineering
the married was huge 2,000 feet long
feeding into hundreds of miles of canals
but within a few years of the 535
catastrophe climatic chaos hit Yemen
first drought and then a succession of
storms and flash floods which weakened
the dam the constant attempts to repair
the dam are recorded on contemporary
inscriptions what we're looking at is
one of the great inscriptions that was
put up on the facade of the dam really
commemorating the rebuilding in this
earth of the dam repair them in this
case in the year 542 and it's a long
inscription describing all the various
people who came and contributed to this
and we can pick out right in the center
here the cartouche the symbol of the
ruler of the kingdom at that stage one
Abraha and there a whole series of these
inscriptions for about two or three
hundred years and then they stopped
which is very indicative of exactly what
the arabic sources are telling us that
there was a period when this dam was
broken and was not repaired again
the Mareb Dan was abandoned its ruin was
also the ruin of Yemen its population
migrated to a new regional power base
which emerged in its place around Medina
and Mecca in 570 ad the Prophet Muhammad
was born in Mecca in precisely that
Mecca Medina area that Muhammad was
based and so it's really the growth of
Medina as a important political center
that is so crucial in the early
development in Islam the climatic chaos
had not only smashed the Mareb Dam and
shifted power to Medina it also brought
Muhammad's own family to prominence the
prophet's family or prophet's ancestors
had taken it upon themselves really to
provide food to import food into this
area and provide food for the population
and this was one of their claims to to
fame and to status Muhammad's family's
reputation for social concern helped his
ministry take root in a time of drought
famine and the plague which had spread
from the Roman Empire oh boy
I think Muhammad's message was
attractive because this was a period of
upheaval and disturbance I've got this
whole apocalyptic atmosphere in the
ancient world at that time there's been
war and there's been revolution the
Roman Empire which really dominated the
political scene for what eight hundred
years appeared to be tottering there is
a lot of apocalyptic literature from
this period there are a lot of people
saying this is terrible the world's
coming to an end how do we interpret
these disasters what are they sign of
and so on the political certainties of
the world were collapsing around
everybody's ears nobody seemed sure of
the future it was a very very unsettled
time to live all these things can be
traced back to an extent to the climatic
chaos caused by the eruption of 535 and
they all feed into the early evolution
of Islam
[Music]
now if a volcanic eruption 535 could
wreak all this havoc and draw the
ancient world to a final close and
really help lay the foundations of the
world we live in today what would happen
if there was another massive eruption
this is not fantasy or wild speculation
while nothing may happen in the next
hundred years there are a handful of
underground volcanic monsters whose
arrival date is long overdue the
granddaddy of them all is believed to be
Yellowstone Caldera Wyoming this
calderas may be twice the size of any
known modern caldera and its eruptions
which have occurred not once not twice
but three times over the last two
million years indicate that it can has
devastated northern america several
times
besides Long Valley caldera there's a
caldera in California which is also
heating up the ground is shaking there
there's been a die-off of the forest by
noxious gases carbon dioxide coming out
of the earth public is very concerned
about that volcano
closer to home for some people would be
the area around Naples Italy sure it's
famous for Vesuvius which is erupted
many times in the past and potentially
will again in the future there is also a
caldera just on the north side of Naples
underlying a metropolitan area of Cappy
Flegrei and Pat's wooly where thousands
of people live and have lived for a long
time the last eruption in the campi
Flegrei complex was in 1538 at that time
3,000 people were killed by the
immediate explosion now 400,000 people
live within the same area the whole
complex is still active and capable of
major eruptions that would be a total
desert disaster for Italy and major
disaster for Europe and would no doubt
have worldwide climatic repercussions
that which would have huge implications
for agriculture huge implications from a
disease pointing in worldwide and would
no doubt have the effect of
destabilizing all sorts of potentially
unstable countries all over the world it
would change our climate it would
produce change in the pattern of wet and
dry cycles for glass portions of the
earth we're familiar with the El Nino
and La Nina effects this would be even a
much greater perturbation perhaps
lowering the temperature the global
average temperature several degrees or
more the biggest effect for people
anywhere is that it's going to disrupt
their the food
and it's going to take years - for the
climate to either go back to normal for
people to change the the crops that they
use and the way that they plant them
there may not be food to import from
other countries because they'll need it
every bit as much or more than than we
will and if our agriculture has failed
in some way then there just wouldn't be
enough to eat I mean not up to me seems
to be the logic of the situation now in
times past you're right subsistence
economies if they had low population
densities they could go to the seashore
and live on shellfish and the people
sometimes did that under real stressful
conditions but you can't do that
nowadays there aren't enough shellfish
to go around if we are confronted with a
global event at any time in the future
it's not quite clear how we would cope
the whole infrastructure of civilization
would collapse around us due to the huge
environmental catastrophe that would
happen because of the failing of a
production the darkening of the skies
communications would be taken out
satellite communication aircraft
transport would be interrupted very
severely for a long period but that type
of event will occur in the future
well people start to struggle for
resources and basically that means
warfare and the modern world it's not
quite clear exactly what would happen
the other sit and starve or you get out
there and try and acquire food there's
not much alternative and a really
stressful fatigue one of the big lessons
from 535 I think is that we're not
talking about a big bang and then the
world changes we're talking about a big
bang and then it takes a hundred to 150
years for the new reality to actually
emerge what will happen in the future of
course one doesn't know that I think
that historians economists politicians
should really pay rather more attention
perhaps to the ability of natural forces
to change history
[Music]
you